projects.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Projects
permalink: /projects/
---

### [Project 1](https://github.com/tux4kids/tuxmania) 
Proin pellentesque malesuada mauris, quis aliquam augue vestibulum ac. Vestibulum ut feugiat nibh. Sed faucibus felis purus, sed convallis leo dictum vehicula.

***

### [Project 2](https://github.com/AkshayAgarwal007/Moodly)
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Nam imperdiet urna eu dolor placerat varius. Vivamus eros augue, consequat id scelerisque nec, fringilla in est. Proin pellentesque malesuada mauris, quis aliquam augue vestibulum ac. Vestibulum ut feugiat nibh. Sed faucibus felis purus, sed convallis leo dictum vehicula.

Proin pellentesque malesuada mauris, quis aliquam augue vestibulum ac. Vestibulum ut feugiat nibh. Sed faucibus felis purus, sed convallis leo dictum vehicula.

***

## Other Projects

### This Could Be Another Project Name

  Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Nam imperdiet urna eu dolor placerat varius. Vivamus eros augue, consequat id scelerisque nec, fringilla in est. Proin pellentesque malesuada mauris, quis aliquam augue vestibulum ac. Vestibulum ut feugiat nibh. Sed faucibus felis purus, sed convallis leo dictum vehicula. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Nam imperdiet urna eu dolor placerat varius. Vivamus eros augue, consequat id scelerisque nec, fringilla in est. Proin pellentesque malesuada mauris, quis aliquam augue vestibulum ac. Vestibulum ut feugiat nibh. Sed faucibus felis purus, sed convallis leo dictum vehicula.
   
### This Could Be Yet Another Project Name

   Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Nam imperdiet urna eu dolor placerat varius. Vivamus eros augue, consequat id scelerisque nec, fringilla in est. Proin pellentesque malesuada mauris, quis aliquam augue vestibulum ac. Vestibulum ut feugiat nibh. Sed faucibus felis purus, sed convallis leo dictum vehicula.


## Contact me

[agarwal.akshay.akshay8@gmail.com](mailto:agarwal.akshay.akshay8@gmail.com)

Commit message:

Update markdown files
- Add improvements to look and feel
- Remove space medium element
- Add small change
- Add native fonts to website
- Fixes some minor changes

projects.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Projects
permalink: /projects/
---

### [uvCharts](https://imaginea.github.io/uvCharts) 
uvCharts is a JavaScript based charting library built using the now famous d3.js library. uvCharts was built during the early days of d3.js while decoupling visualization needs in another open source initiative called AuroraViz. 

uvCharts lets you skip all the tough learning and coding part involved with d3.js and yet build simple, robust, completely customisable charts on any page on the web with utmost ease.

### [Yam'in](https://imaginea.github.io/Yamin)
Yamin was conceptualized by few colleagues of mine who built the early proof of concept of making the Yammer experience blend in to one's browsing experience by making a dockable extension which was ever present around the user. 

I joined in the proof of concept, refactored and redesigned the entire User Experience mimicking much of one's mobile experience using such social networks.

### [Marvelous](https://github.io/hashd/Marvelous)
During the early days of Electron, I sought out to build an markdown editor much like Mou from the OSX world because the Linux world lacked a good markdown editor. Marvelous is a work of mine and couple of my colleagues at Pramati Technologies.

We leveraged Simple MDE Editor project to power the internal editor and scripted everything else that powers the application. Later we forked Simple MDE Editor and wrote custom extensions to enhance the user experience, we had named the fork as **Mendel**.

### [the_fuzz](https://github.com/hashd/the_fuzz)
For one of the POCs I was working on, in Elixir I needed to implement fuzzy search much like how modern IDEs or Editors let us search through files, during which I had come across a library that implemented few of the algorithms. I joined in the project and implemented quite a few algorithms myself and contributed back. Currently a maintainer of the project along with the original author.

Find the library on [Hex](https://hex.pm/packages/the_fuzz), official package manager for Elixir.

### [bitmap-elixir](https://github.com/hashd/bitmap-elixir)
For the POC mentioned above, I also needed a bitmap data structure to store information. And since there was no alternative library back in those days, I went onto build a library so that other developers could leverage it. 

Benchmarks made interesting revelations of the implementations and efficiency of the binary and integer primitive types.

Find the library on [Hex](https://hex.pm/packages/bitmap), official package manager for Elixir.

### [Alobmat](https://github.com/hashd/alobmat)
Designed and developed a Phoenix application to host multiple instances of a Indian social board game called Housie. The server can host upto 100,000 different instances of the game and handle more than a million connections simultaneously with minimal latency thus powering a real time experience.

## Other Contributions
